the world can change the world can
change
for you and me here and now in our
generation
but it's not going to change because we
want it to
the world's going to change when we
start to make sacrifices when we start
to make hard choices
when we're willing to get uncomfortable
if you think nothing can fundamentally
change
within one generation just look at the
change for gay rights
now i'm going to assume
nobody in my audience is homophobic
not consciously or intentionally so
if you had a baby that you had to give
away for adoption
you had just two choices you could go to
one adoption agency
where you're 100 certain it'll be given
to a gay or lesbian couple or go to
another adoption agency
will be raised by a pair of heterosexual
parents which agency
are you going to choose i know many
people
who are not homophobic who would not
hesitate to say
that they would prefer that their own
child
if they had to give their child up for
adoption be raised by a pair of
heterosexual parents
rather than a gay couple or a lesbian
couple
i'm not one of them here
in white english-speaking canada
or in texas or in georgia
or in new york city one of the strongest
reasons
to choose the gay adoption agency
is that it's extremely unlikely that my
child would be raised
by fundamentalist christians or by
anyone who is a member
of any religion really taking it too
terribly seriously
i would like to think that any muslim
christian or jew who is in a
committed open gay marriage
who goes to adopt is gonna be someone
who is i
if they're not atheist or highly secular
in their
outlook in the world they will at least
have a very detached
modern view of whatever religion it is
that
they're a member of i i would like to
think so you're
you're playing the statistics right
playing the odds
if you think the world can't change
just think about how amazing it is that
in 2021
this is even an option we're talking
about when i was a child
the debate was whether or not allowing
gay couples to adopt
children at all should be legal or
illegal
and that was a fiercely fought debate
on both sides but inevitably and
inexorably
what people had to admit to themselves
was that some heterosexual people are
terrible parents
and some gay people are terrible parents
and the difference between being a good
parent and a bad parent
is not the difference between being
straight and being gay
this isn't a criterion that you can use
to disqualify people
from raising children
what about religion though
do you think there are some religious
views
that should disqualify you from being
able to adopt a child
do you think there aren't any do you
think there aren't any beliefs at all
that you disqualify someone from
adopting and raising a child what if
it's your child
what if you quite literally have skin in
the game what if it's your child
being given up for adoption are you okay
with a neo-nazi
raising your child are you okay with a
supporter of isis or the taliban
there are no ideological limits
there are no beliefs that we would use
to distinguish
whether people should or should not have
certain political rights
that would disqualify them from
participating for example
in adoption as equals
my father had a whole bunch of kids
with a whole bunch of different women
and he made it sound really cool i
should totally like
try that sometime one of these women he
got pregnant and
i don't even know what he promised her
but she kept the baby and then she
figured out my father was a terrible
person
she decided to give this kid up for
adoption
i am considered ethnically jewish
because my
mother is jewish my father was not
jewish in any way
and this woman whom he got pregnant had
a kid with
she also was not jewish in any way
and she made the decision to give this
kid
to a jewish only adoption agency
an agency that guaranteed the baby would
be given
to and raised by jewish parents
why would you do that why would anyone
do that
it's because she didn't want the baby to
be raised by
crazy christians christian
fundamentalists and she knew
living where she did in white english
speaking canada
there were a lot of christians who had
big families the christians who already
had four kids
who went out and adopted a fifth because
that's how they felt about
showing love and lord and i would
suppose
she had a bit of a stereotype notion
of jews as being more intellectually or
culturally refined
this is a stereotype that youtube is
helping to break down
we get to see the reality of who
everybody is here on youtube
and in the old days you know there were
really just a few people on tv
you know einstein sigmund freud
kind of a cherry-picking selection of
who got famous and who was celebrated so
i have
a half brother who is zero percent
jewish ethnically whereas i'm 50
jewish uh and people perceive me as 100
jewish nobody calls me irish
i don't know why
but he was raised by a jewish architect
who adopted him in toronto
so they're hypothetical questions i'm
asking but they're
only half a step removed from reality
i suppose that you dear viewer are not
homophobic and you're not islamophobic
if it were your baby if you had a
newborn baby right now
and you had to choose between giving
that baby to a christian only
adoption agency a jewish only adoption
agency
or a muslim-only adoption agency
which one would you choose
if you think we're all equal
if you think it doesn't matter
if you think that someone who believes
in and practices the islamic faith is
going to be just as good a parent to
your child
as an atheist as a secular family
or even even compared to a
fundamentalist christian if you think
they're going to give your child
just as bright a future oh oh
right and you know what
let's say it was a daughter let let's
just say
let's just say it wasn't your son it was
your daughter
you were giving up for adoption which
which set of dice do you want to roll
giving up to a muslim agency a jewish
agency
or a christian nation it's a terrible
choice isn't it
and you know the truth is i think if i
were sitting and having this
conversation with someone
who was actually a member of the
christian faith of the jewish faith or
the muslim faith
they would have to stop and reflect on
what a terrible choice is themselves
because even the most deluded true
believing christians they're aware of
who their fellow christians are
even the most atheist secular members of
the jewish faith
they have some sense of what's going on
in israel and what's going on
you know at the shul down the block
what's going on politically in terms of
what these people actually believe in
practice
oh gee if i give my kid up for adoption
you have some direct sense of who your
co-religionists are okay
things can change we can have
a fundamentally secular atheist
society but not just if you
want it only
if you're willing to get uncomfortable
only if you're willing to make
terrible sacrifices and the change is
going to involve
coercion i had a teacher
and it's a little bit significant for
this story that this was a male
teacher married to a female teacher and
they both taught in the same school
at that age i was not
the self-confident well-spoken person
that i am today
i would have been 11 when this happened
and i was still figuring out what the
political status
of homosexuals in our society was and
such a different political context in
those days you know
insults against homosexual people for
being homosexual were heard on the
schoolyard
every day constantly it was
frankly the definition of being weak or
stupid or clumsy
to be called gay right it was heard
constantly but i was aware there was
this struggle for gay rights and gay
equality going on
and the other hand there was also a huge
discourse at that time that's now
forgotten
about trying to medicalize homosexuality
and i knew many children who believed in
this
out of ignorance people who tried to
present homosexuality
as if it had crept into our society
because the drinking water was poisoned
there was too much air pollution
this was some kind of recent thing in
our society and that could be cured
right so there were a lot of um powerful
messages and sources of misinformation
around me
and i was taken into class with this
this male teacher just once
and it was because he was he was popular
with the other teachers and his
female teacher was married to and we got
a special
sex ed class with that male teacher he
wasn't
he wasn't my teacher i saw him rarely in
the school
and i guess it was just because he likes
to give that class and other teachers
didn't want to do the job and the other
teachers i can't say all the teachers in
the school but some four or five
teachers in the room
who all thought this was kind of upbeat
and fun and funny
and this guy gave the most horrifyingly
homophobic lecture to us imaginable
constantly conflating homophobic pardon
me
constantly complaining homosexuality
with pedophilia
like claiming that he claimed openly
that you shouldn't allow homosexuals to
be schoolteachers because if you do they
will
molest the kids like
it's very easy to say that today
any school teacher gave that lecture
especially if it were recorded on
someone's cell phone
would be fired or would be asked to
resign
okay and i can't say that
students were cool with it i mean we
were children i think the students
didn't know how to respond
the other teachers were cool thing they
were kind of like laughing and
encouraging them to go along they'd all
heard it before they'd heard him give
this lecture
once or twice a year every year for
who knows how many years this was his
perspective
on human sexuality and i mean he covered
all this stuff from such a crass
vulgar perspective he talked about
getting late in college
you know and it stays with me i'm cursed
with a really accurate memory i could
i could repeat you know more or less
verbatim
stuff this guy it was it was a really
disturbing experience for me
but it was disturbing because of the
fundamental
political and ethical question right
of the status of homosexuals and gay
rights
in our society and i mean it was
disturbing because it was an authority
figure in a school
teaching this as curriculum it wasn't
just someone's crazy gay uncle
you know at a garden party right
now firing that teacher you know
using coercion hey
being the thought police requiring
requiring
that your teachers believe in and
support and propound
the government's own doctrine on gay
rights it's made a lot of people
uncomfortable
i mean who knows there are no statistics
for this how many
god-fearing traditional christians male
and female
became school teachers in canada in the
united states
how many of them grew up as good bible
bashing
you know day care center volunteering i
love kids
kind of people people who love kids and
love jesus and think they're making the
world a better place
and went into that job 100 expecting to
do the lord's work
and then found out that in the eyes of
the department of education
in the eyes of the government in the
eyes of the general public they were a
thought criminal
for teaching things that to them
you know they learned from their own
parents and grandparents things they
would say
around their own dinner table that that
wasn't just not permissible
in their professional you know metier as
a as a school teacher
but that was punishable you know you
could be fired and indeed you could
become
cancelled you know you could become
pariah socially as a result
i knew a family
of nazis
i didn't know them real well did i
mention that i'm jewish
the father had been
a schoolteacher until one day and i
heard this story from many people
because there were many witnesses until
one day he gave a lecture to the class
that today we would describe as
alt-right or race realism
what this teacher told the students in
the class was that it was okay for them
to be friends with members of other
races for the black kids to be friends
with kids
as long as they knew as long as they
were prepared
for the eventuality that there was a
race war coming
and in the near future our parents were
going to be killing each other and we
were going to be at war with each other
you know we're going to be killing each
other in the streets
i realize this is hard to believe and
even as a child when i heard this story
from multiple sources
i found it hard to believe
i saw that guy i never really spoke to
him
i knew his kids
i walked past his house frequently
he had a team of those stereotypically
nazi
attack dogs i think doberman pinchers
right everything about this guy
everything about his attack dogs
everything about his wife
everything about his kids absolutely
clicked with this story i don't want to
name his kids
obviously on some level i don't know if
the story is true
he gave his sons names
that only a neo-nazi would give their
kids
like either you are a neo-nazi if you
give your kids these particular names
or you're one of those people who's into
the revival
of the pre-christian germanic gods
uh almost all those people are neo-nazis
you know like you'd have to be
everything checked out with this story
and i heard it back from multiple
witnesses
this guy had been a schoolteacher and
what i was told was that after he was i
he was either fired or asked to resign
and resigned
because he was told he would be fired um
i was told that after he stopped being a
schoolteacher
he had to drive a taxi cab for a living
i don't know if he did that forever or
what he did immediately thereafter okay
i remember the guy i remember the story
i remember meeting his sons
they were they were students in my
school and i remember
so many times walking past that fence
with that team of attack dogs you know
um
do you think anyone can be a
schoolteacher
regardless of what they believe all
right do you think neo-nazis
can be school teachers do you think they
have freedom of conscience freedom of
belief
right do you think there is nothing
in the muslim faith that is as
incompatible
with modern secular western democracy
as the tenets of neo-nazism
the transition we're talking about here
to a truly secular democracy
to an atheist society okay it's going to
mean real sacrifices
it's going to make a lot of people
uncomfortable
now what the french have done is set
down a very strange series of precedents
for us
the first big controversy had to do with
banning the head scarf really banning
women
concealing their faces for religious
reasons
right and many many years after this
happened in france
the same drama played out in quebec the
former french colony
now a province of canada in quebec they
phrased the law a little bit differently
so it was banning
all overt or ostentatious
symbols of the religious faith you're a
member of
but that included headscarves for muslim
women
and face coverings what have you and so
it was established in quebec that if you
were a public sector employee of any
kind a school teacher or a nurse
wearing this kind of costume would be
bad
how long is it going to take for us to
admit to ourselves
that what we're banning is not the hat
it's what goes on inside people's heads
right what we're banning is not the
costume it's the belief
be tokened by the costume right
like is it really the nazi
flag we're offended by is it really
someone having nazi tattoos
that's a problem no it's the belief
it's the commitment it's the ideology
right on a
fairly deep level it's morally and
ethically
who they are now i do not
think that islam should be singled out
for persecution in france and i don't
think it should be singled out
in china and i don't think it should be
singled out
in canada or the united states the more
we admit
what the problems with islam are
the more we have to confront those
problems within christianity
within judaism even within other
religions that are marginal to our part
of the world
like buddhism which i happen to have
some expertise in right
like inasmuch as these same problems
appear also within buddhism or hinduism
right we're also going to have to use
coercion to eliminate them
france passed a law i'm sorry i don't
think it's passed i think they've just
proposed the law
as of today as of this date on the
calendar they have proposed and they are
debating a law
that is innocuously said to be opposed
to
muslim separatism right
and from my perspective that is
precisely what makes it
an unfair and immoral law
all right because the problem isn't
separatism
the problem is islam
and inasmuch as the problem isn't in
islam
we have to recognize the same problems
when they occur
within christianity
we have separate communities of
christians
don't we right do you see what it's
getting at this idea of separatism
we have communities of christians that
live as live as communes
cut off from the outside world right and
they don't send their kids to normal
secular schools they don't wear normal
secular clothes
right you know what i'm talking about
whether you think of the amish or the
mennonites or what have you
uh we have a whole bunch of them in in
saskatchewan
and manitoba in the middle middle
prairies the parts of canada where land
is cheap enough
and they raise their kids in ignorance
to work on the farm and so on
they're a separate society within
canada is that the problem why is that
only a problem
when it's islam right why is that not a
problem for christians
we had a case here in canada against
orthodox jews i forget if it went to the
supreme court or just a
medium level court frankly but it went
up several levels of the court
we had a case about whether or not
it was legal for orthodox jews
to operate a separate bus company
a bus company that only sold tickets to
and it's only four
orthodox jews and you know what the
crazy part is wasn't a human rights case
this wasn't about like equality like hey
i if i'm not jewish i should be able to
buy a ticket to get on that bus too it
wasn't about no no no it wasn't like
black people
complaining they were discriminated
against but no
the case was brought by another bus
company saying it was unfair competition
okay they're making less money because
of this
all right there's no doubt that
the threat posed by islamic terrorism
you know the threat posed by the
cultural
contrast between islam and you know
the western mainstream there's no doubt
that that's drawn our attention
to what the fundamental you know issues
are in the 21st century okay
but you know let's treat as
shallow what is shallow and let's treat
as profound
what is truly profound okay you can ask
someone
to change their headdress you can ask
to change their scarf you can ask
christians literally come back to this
case now not to wear their christian
crosses on the outside of their clothes
but to put them under
their shirt okay you can ask members of
other religions to take off their turban
i don't even know if a turban counts as
a religious symbol
what if what if you're just rocking a
turban because you think it's
fashionable i mean you know
all these things
ultimately it's never going to be about
addressing
the costume it's going to be about
competence confidence
to do what competence
to take on fully the duties of being a
citizen
in a democracy okay who is competent
to be a school teacher who is competent
to be a police officer
all right who is competent to debate the
laws
and make the laws who is competent you
know to shape the minds and expectations
of the next generation i don't think
it's a shallow or trivial thing
that teachers were fired for homophobia
that this new standard emerged
in our society of what was acceptable
and what was not
and that educational institutions took
on the burden of saying hey
we have a homophobic society we have a
homophobic culture we live in a country
we're on the school yard every day
kids little kids call other little kids
gay and worst names
you know insults specifically linked to
homosexuality they're hearing the whole
time
and it's not enough for us to just
silently passively
preserve our own moral superiority we
have to get out there and
actively counter that we have to
actively overturn
centuries of normalization of homophobia
and train children to live in a new
world a world that doesn't even exist
yet
where homosexuals and heterosexuals
really are
equal right
we have to with at least that much
coercion
quite possibly much much more overturned
centuries and millennia of religious
thinking
of tradition and prepare our children
not to live in the world as it is
but in the world as it should be